---
title: "FOSDEM 2024"
toc: false
draft: true
categories:
  - Conferences
tags:
  - fosdem
  - dev
  - open source
  - foss
excerpt: "Open source, cool tech, stickers, and more!"
header:
  overlay_image: /assets/images/fosdem-2024/main-lecture-theater-cropped.jpg
  overlay_filter: 0.5 # same as adding an opacity of 0.5 to a black background
  actions:
    - label: "More Info"
      url: "https://fosdem.org"
---

FOSDEM is a free event where developers meet to share their passion for free and open source software.
The 2024 edition took place on February 2nd and 3rd 2024 in Brussels, Belgium.
This conference consists in many small talks delivered in lecture theaters spread out across the Universite Libre de Bruxelles, each dedicated to a specific topic.

I attended about ten talks in total.
I would recommend getting in quite early as some devroom are crazy hard to get into.
I had to queue for about one hour to get into the Rust devroom, because people would wait for so long to get a seat that they would just never leave.
While I was somewhat disappointed by the overall quality of the talks, some of them were really interesting.

One talk I really enjoyed was [*Effortless Bug Hunting with Differential Fuzzing*](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-1927-effortless-bug-hunting-with-differential-fuzzing/) by Maciej Mionskowski from the Go devroom.
This presentation first dived into different common fuzzing techniques, such as passing random data to a function and checking if it crashes.
We were then introduced to differential fuzzing, which consists in comparing the result of the implementation being tested to that of a different implementation.
Other implementations may be obtained from code refactoring, from a previous less optimized version of the function, or even from an implementation from a library written in a different language.

Another talk I found really instructive was [*The Four Horsemen of Bad Rust Code*](https://fosdem.org/2024/schedule/event/fosdem-2024-2434-the-four-horsemen-of-bad-rust-code/) from Matthias Endler in the Rust devroom.
This is probably because I could relate to almost all the Rust bad practices the presenter mentionned.
I could tell just by looking at the slides that the speaker put a lot of work into his presentation.
According to him, the four rust worst practices are: ignorance, excessive abstraction, premature optimization, and omission.
I believe these bad practices may be taken care off by applying the three steps of software development: make it work, make it right, make it fast.
This is especially true with Rust where it is very easy to get overwhelmed wanting to write idiomatic and optimized Rust code from the start.
But when it comes to writing idiomatic Rust code, as always, practice makes perfect!

Overwall, I did not regret attending FOSDEM.
The open source community is very diverse and passionate, and I enjoyed exchanging with other members.
But more importantly, it felt good to sit next to people who, like you, use a GNU/Linux distros and a windows manager tuned to their preference, and could talk about why a language is better than another for hours.

